Sam McGee’s Cabin
The real story behind the Robert Service poem The Cremation of Sam McGee

The infamous McGee from Robert Service lore was not really from Tennessee. In fact, the real Sam McGee is reported to have come from Ontario. Nor was he cremated on the marge at Lake Lebarge, but he did die in early 1909 at the age of 74. And, he worked the northern land and mined the cold ore.

Sam McGee came to the Yukon in 1898, like many others, to seek his fortune. McGee worked claims and ran businesses. He also freighted goods over the White Pass trail, and later worked as a road and machine operator.

Soon after settling in Whitehorse he met Robert Service, who was working at the Whitehorse branch of the Bank of Commerce. Service was intrigued by the sound of McGee’s name, and so he asked if he could use it in a poem.

While living here in the Yukon, in 1899, McGee built a log cabin on the corner of Steele Street and Front Street, about a mile from downtown Whitehorse. The cabin was used as a residence until 1909 when McGee died. In 1940, the Imperial Order of the Daughters of the Empire acquired and renovated the cabin. It was donated to the MacBride Museum in 1954.

The story of The Cremation of Sam McGee was most likely inspired by the hardships of the northern frontier, and the poem’s humor and irony captured the imagination of readers everywhere. Service’s poem was first published in 1907 in Songs of a Sourdough, and it became one of the most famous ballads of the North. The poem tells of a man who freezes to death in the Arctic cold, and whose body is cremated by his companion, only to be found alive and warm inside the furnace.

The real Sam McGee caused Service and his family to make many explanations to those who took the poem literally. Service once wrote: “The real Sam McGee was a living man, and he was not cremated. He was a good friend of mine, and I used his name because it suited the rhythm of the poem. I have had to explain this so often that my wife says I should carry on my person a printed card with the words: ‘The real Sam McGee was not cremated.’”

Built 1899

A man from home, who went prospecting in the Klondike last winter, tells of finding the body, frozen stiff, in the ashes of a burned cabin on the shore of Lake Lebarge. He says that the body was in a sitting position, and that the face was turned toward the fire, as if the man had been trying to warm himself. The body was identified as that of Sam McGee, a prospector from Whitehorse, who had been missing for some time. The story of his death is told in Robert Service’s famous poem, The Cremation of Sam McGee.

Sam McGee built this cabin 1899, while living in downtown Whitehorse. In 1940, the Imperial Order of the Daughters of the Empire acquired and renovated the cabin. It was donated to the MacBride Museum in 1954.

...thanks a.i.
